CHAPTER ONE



Punishment



The day before I met Sibongile was my last day at school. I'd been at an expensive private high school in Harare, the capital of Zimbabwe, for seven years. But on the day I met Sibongile I woke up in the small village of Mangwe Ford. The houses were huts made of mud and grass, there was no electricity or running water, and the nearest telephone was two hours' walk away. I felt lost, like a train without its rails.



The sun was rising when I came out of the guest hut where I'd slept. In front of me was a clearing in the forest with huge trees all around it. Sunlight sliced between the branches. On the other side of the clearing, a tall young woman with a huge basket on her head was walking away from me along a path. Dust rose round her feet. There was no one else around, but I could smell smoke from a cooking fire somewhere. My six-year-old brother Amos, who'd slept beside me on the floor, had gone out earlier.



I stepped away from the door and a second young woman, who was hurrying to catch the other one up, ran into me. Her basket went flying. T-shirts, dresses and underwear rained down as I held her arm to stop her falling over.



'I didn't see you,' she said.



'Obviously,' I replied. 'Are you OK?'



She looked up at me from under her eyelashes with a wide smile. 'I'm fine. But you're standing on my best dress.'



I stepped back. A dress had fallen on the path. It was very dirty. 'I'm sorry,' I said. 'You're going to do your laundry?'



'Yes,' she said, picking up the clothes and putting them back in the basket. 'The clothes were already dirty, but you've made them worse. Your punishment is to help us.'



'Punishment?' I said, surprised.



'Certainly. Follow me.' She lifted her basket back on to her head and set off, her body moving invitingly.



I was confused about this 'punishment'. Was it something accepted in village culture, or just her way of laughing at a new arrival? But I followed anyway, enjoying watching her from behind.



We passed under the trees, crossed a wide area of white sand and came to the river. The other young woman was already knee-deep in the water, beating clothes on the rocks. She looked at me and smiled - a polite, friendly smile. My knees went weak and I sat down rather suddenly on a rock.



The young woman I'd followed said, 'I'm Beatrice.' She waved a hand at the tall one. 'And that's Sibongile.'



I swallowed. 'Hi,' I said. What was wrong with my voice?



Sibongile said, 'Hi,' and went back to work.



Beatrice said to me, 'Here. Take my dress. Wet it and beat it on the rock, like this.'



But I sat with the dress in my hands. I hardly heard what Beatrice said because I was watching Sibongile.



'OK,' said Beatrice. 'If you don't know how to wash clothes, you'll have to tell us all about yourself.'



'Will that be my "punishment"?' I asked.



She nodded. 'What's your name?' she shot at me.



'Tendai Muruvi,' I answered.



'And how old are you?'



'Eighteen,' I said. 'I finished school yesterday.'



'Which school?'



'A private school near Harare.' Maybe Sibongile couldn't hear me. I spoke a little louder over the sounds of the river and the laundry. 'My dad's boss, Owen Woods, was rich until last week. He paid for me to go there, and wanted me to go to university.'



Beatrice spoke as she worked. 'Is your dad... the man who is ill? What does he do?'



'Now? Nothing. He was chief mechanic on Mr Woods' orange farm near Harare. The Woods family left suddenly last week and the farm was taken over two days later.'



Beatrice and Sibongile looked at each other. I guessed they already knew about Mr Woods' farm, and all the workers being forced to leave due to the Land Reform Programme. They knew because my stepmother, Abigail, came from this village. She'd brought my sick dad and my brother and sisters here three days ago, because she had nowhere else to go.



I said, 'But you know all that already.' Sibongile didn't react. I stood up, ready to leave. My legs were OK now.



But Beatrice wasn't going to let me go. 'Why didn't you come with your family?'



'Because I was still at school when the farm was occupied,' I said. 'I came here on the bus from Harare. It took all day, and left me at Baobab Cross. I walked from there.'



Sibongile looked up. 'Do you know Harare?' she asked.



'A bit,' I answered. She really was lovely. I sat down again.



'Do you play any sports?' asked Beatrice. Sibongile looked away again, the flying drops of water from her work making shining lines of light in the sun.



'I was captain of the school rugby team,' I answered.



Beatrice smiled at me. 'Did you bring anything nice with you, like... chocolate?' They both exploded with laughter.



I stood up. 'Ladies,' I said, 'I must see how my father is.'



'Wouldn't you like to ask us anything?' Beatrice asked.



I was suddenly full of anger. 'Lots of things,' I shouted. 'What will my family do here? Will my dad recover? How am I going to study now? How do I get out of here?'



They both looked at me in surprise. Then Sibongile came over to me, looked me in the eyes and said, 'This is quite a large village, you know, even though it's so new. We have cows, chickens and goats, and vegetable gardens. We have cool shade, and water all year round. It was built near the Wildlife Park for tourists to visit. There are no tourists now, of course, but compared to other places, we're lucky.'



Her lovely face was completely serious. She was trying to make me feel better, but I hardly heard her words. I was trying very hard not to put my arms around her and squeeze her till she couldn't breathe. I'd never felt like that before and it confused me.



Stupidly, I said, 'I didn't want to come here.'



'It's not so bad,' Sibongile said. 'When we first came, I missed my cellphone and the TV and stuff. But it gets easier.'



'How?' I asked.



She turned back to her work with a smile. 'For a start,' she said, 'we have a wind-up charger for our cellphones now. We can charge up the batteries by hand.'



'But,' said Beatrice, 'there's no signal, so they're useless anyway.'



They both laughed at this wonderful joke. I turned back towards the huts. I had to get control of myself.



'See you later?' Beatrice asked.



'Maybe,' I said and walked back across the sand.





CHAPTER TWO



Thieves



My dad was still sick. He was sitting on the earth bench by the wall in the main guest hut. His skin was dry and grey and he seemed blind, although his eyes were open. When I spoke to him, he didn't answer. My worry and anger were like dark clouds in my mind. But my excitement at meeting Sibongile was like the sun shining between them.



I went out to sit near the fire. My baby sister Gugu was sleeping in a box on the ground. My stepmother Abigail brought me tea.



'When did Dad get like this?' I asked.



'After they occupied the farm,' she replied, sitting down on a cloth on the ground. 'He went into Harare to find work. But there were hundreds of men and no jobs. He came back, went into our house and I found him like this in the kitchen.'



'I remember hearing that he did this when my mum died,' I said. 'It seems that he got better in a few days.'



Abigail shook her head. 'He just sits, looking at his feet.'



'It's been such a shock for him,' I said. 'For all of us...'



'Your brother and sister don't seem too upset,' said Abigail with the first smile I'd seen on her face since I arrived. 'Amos has found lots of friends and Memory's already planning our new huts.' Baby Gugu began to wake up.



Two older women came and joined us by the fire. They started talking to Abigail about making a new vegetable garden, so I went back to my hut and began to unpack.



Most of my stuff was in plastic bags. I'd had to leave a lot behind, at school. They said I could collect it later. When the plastic bags were empty, I wasn't sure what to do with them. But Amos had suddenly appeared, and he knew.



'Can I have those?' he asked.



'Sure,' I said. 'What do you want them for?'



'A ball!' he laughed up at me, his teeth shining white in the dark hut.



'Of course. Want some help?' I felt myself smiling. His little round cheeks caught the light from the door. He took my hand and led me outside.



We sat on the earth with our backs against the mud wall of the hut. It was shady there, under the huge trees.



I started knotting the bags together. But my confused thoughts made me too fierce, and the plastic tore. Amos's big eyes looked up at me. I tried again.



Two more six-or seven-year-old boys came across the clearing in front of us. They stood watching me, waiting.



'How's that?' I asked Amos when I was satisfied.



'Great!' He jumped up and reached for the ball.



I stood up and kicked it out into the sunshine. Like magic, five or six more boys appeared. Amos got to the ball first and the game began.



I watched them for a moment. They were so happy, laughing and shouting.



I went back into the hut to look at what I'd brought with me. There was my school uniform, which I would never wear again, the jeans I was wearing and another pair, two or three T-shirts, and two pairs of shoes - probably as many clothes as most people who lived in the village. And I had some books, my maths things and my cellphone.



But I doubted we could afford to pay for that, even if there'd been a signal. One minute I was thinking, 'Life is trying to punish me!' and I wanted to swear or punch someone. The next minute I was smiling and remembering Sibongile's face.



'Now I know what "mixed-up" means,' I thought, laying out my clothes on my shelf with great care.



Abigail came in with baby Gugu tied on her back. She had some clean clothes in her hands.



'These are Amos's,' she said.



She went over and started arranging Amos's things on his shelf. I took Gugu's little hand between my fingers and made faces at her. She laughed.



The kids outside were making a lot of noise as they played.



Abigail turned to me. 'Uncle Winston and Aunt Ivy want us to eat with them today. I'm going now to help prepare the meal...' As so often with Abigail, I couldn't be sure what she wanted from me. Abigail's Uncle Winston was the head of the village, Chief Majozi. I'd met him and Aunt Ivy the night before. I knew this meal would be important.



I was just going to ask her if I should go with her to help, when the noise of the football game suddenly stopped. We went out to see why. The children were all standing silently under a large tree, looking up.



I called out, 'What's wrong?'



Amos pointed up. 'A monkey stole the ball!' he shouted. He sounded so horrified that we all laughed.



Our laughter frightened the monkeys and they started towards the river, jumping through the branches. I ran after them with the others.



At the edge of the riverbed the trees stopped. The monkeys gathered together in the last branches and had a shouted discussion. The riverbed sand was so white that it hurt my eyes in the midday sun.



The children were jumping up and down, shouting at the monkeys. 'Thieves! Thieves! Give it back!'



'You'll get sick if you eat it,' Memory called to the monkeys. She was only eleven, but already behaved like a little mother.



The monkeys began to fight over the ball, their screams echoing through the forest. Finally, they threw it down on to the sand at the foot of a huge tree. All the boys ran towards it, with Amos in front. He always was the fastest runner.



I watched as Amos turned on one foot to kick the ball back - and suddenly flames and smoke shot out of the ground.
